Blog: 2026-07-28 specification release candidate (#2750)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: blog/content/posts/2026-05-19-mcp-2026-06-30-rc.md

---
title: "The 2026-06-30 MCP Specification Release Candidate"
date: "2026-05-19T09:00:00+00:00"
publishDate: "2026-05-19T09:00:00+00:00"
slug: 2026-06-30-release-candidate
description: "The release candidate for the next Model Context Protocol (MCP) specification is now available: a stateless protocol core, the Extensions framework, Tasks, MCP Apps, authorization hardening, and a formal deprecation policy."
author:
  - David Soria Parra (Lead Maintainer)
  - Den Delimarsky (Lead Maintainer)
tags:
  - mcp
  - spec
  - release
  - protocol
ShowToc: true
---

Picture a remote MCP server in production today. It sits behind a load balancer,
but the load balancer is configured for sticky sessions because the `initialize`
handshake and the `Mcp-Session-Id` header tie every subsequent request to the
instance that handled the first one. A gateway in front of it wants to
rate-limit `tools/call` separately from `tools/list`, but it can't tell them
apart without parsing the JSON-RPC body. An orchestrator running fifty subagents
against that server makes fifty separate `tools/list` calls because it has no

> idea whether the result is safe to share.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
idea whether the result is safe to reuse across callers.
```
"share" evokes "share button" for me, think reuse might be more clear

Content-Type: application/json

{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":2,"method":"tools/call",
 "params":{"name":"search","arguments":{"q":"otters"}}}
```

In `2026-06-30`, the same call is a single self-contained request that any
server instance can handle:

```http
POST /mcp HTTP/1.1
MCP-Protocol-Version: 2026-06-30
Mcp-Method: tools/call
Mcp-Name: search
Content-Type: application/json

{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":1,"method":"tools/call",
 "params":{"name":"search","arguments":{"q":"otters"},
           "_meta":{"io.modelcontextprotocol/clientInfo":{"name":"my-app","version":"1.0"}}}}
```

### The handshake and session are gone

The `initialize`/`initialized` handshake is removed
([SEP-2575](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2575)).
The protocol version, client info, and client capabilities that used to be
exchanged once at connection time now travel in `_meta` on every request, and a
new `server/discover` method lets clients fetch server capabilities when they
need them up front.

The `Mcp-Session-Id` header and the protocol-level session that came with it are
also removed
([SEP-2567](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol/pull/2567)).

> Servers that need to carry state across calls do it the way HTTP APIs always

Reviewer: optional: this sentence is pretty important, might be worth its own section (I missed it on first skim).  want to assure people who rely on state in their application that they have options

Reviewer 2: +1 - I'd maybe have a section that is e.g. titled "stateless protocol, not stateless applications". The references to HTTP are a good anchor.
